docs: add getting started vignette (#74)
NovoNordisk-OpenSource/mighty.component: vignettes/mighty-component.Rmd

Reviewer: [Mustache code chunks](https://github.com/NovoNordisk-OpenSource/mighty.component/blob/69a713d844b0ec081aada6a3ed716e7a8349dc0f/vignettes/mighty-component.Rmd#L48) does not have "Copy to clipboard" icon

<img width="136" height="95" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/726961a1-d894-4e30-a36e-b5f6f3fb887c" />

_Could_ be enabled via `klippy`(requires addition to `Suggests:` in DESCRIPTION as well

```suggestion
```{r, include = FALSE}
klippy::klippy(all_precode = TRUE)
```

Author: Agreed. Will include copy functionality; either with klippy or Quarto.

Author: Made them R code blocks, and then it comes automatically :)

snippet that reads a data set, modifies it, and writes it back can be expressed
as a component.

Components combine two ideas:

- **Mustache templating** — placeholders like `{{ domain }}` are filled in at
  render time, so the same logic works across different data sets and variables.
- **Roxygen-like documentation** — tags like `@title`, `@param`, and `@depends`
  describe what the component does, what it needs, and what it produces.

Think of components as reusable building blocks: each one handles a single
derivation or transformation, and you compose several of them to build a
complete program.

## Anatomy of a component template

Below is a minimal component that doubles a column. Every tag is visible at a
glance:
```
#' @title Double a variable
#' @description
#' Creates a new column that is twice the value of an existing column.
#'
#' @param domain `character` Name of the domain (data frame)
#' @param input `character` Name of the existing column to double
#' @param output `character` Name of the new column to create
#' @type derivation
#' @depends {{domain}} {{input}}
#' @outputs {{output}}
#' @code
{{domain}} <- {{domain}} |>
  dplyr::mutate(

>     {{output}} = 2 * {{input}}

Reviewer: I suppose the developer of the component has to be aware of types. I.e., the rendered component will fail at run-time if the `{{input}}` is not a double or integer. Do we need to comment on such conditions (that mighty.component does not verify correctness on rendered components but that this can be done via unit tests)?

Author: Will add lines saying it is only doing code rendering, and no input checking in terms of types etc. To do this add defensive programming in the component.

>     {{output}} = 2 * {{input}}

Author: Update to use triple brackets.

  )
```

### Tags reference

| Tag | Purpose |
|-----|---------|
| `@title` | One-line title (required) |
| `@description` | Multi-line description (required) |
| `@param name description` | Declares a Mustache placeholder the user must supply at render time |

> | `@type` | Semantic type: `derivation`, `predecessor`, `assigned`, or `row` |

Reviewer: I guess we need to maintain references between packages on things like type which is [also described in mighty](https://shiny-waffle-l197g87.pages.github.io/articles/code_components.html#type). Here we could expand and refer to this place from mighty (probably [keeping the part about derivation/row](https://shiny-waffle-l197g87.pages.github.io/articles/code_components.html#column-vs-row-components))

Author: Will check the mighty vignette. Agree generally to link to mighty.component vignette from mighty.

> | `@type` | Semantic type: `derivation`, `predecessor`, `assigned`, or `row` |

Author: Instead of "semantic type" use "component type"

| `@depends domain column` | Declares that the code reads `column` from `domain` (repeat for each) |
| `@outputs variable` | Declares a column the code creates (repeat for each) |
| `@code` | Everything below this tag is executable R code |

### Mustache syntax

Components use [Mustache](https://mustache.github.io) — a simple, logic-less
templating language. Inside `@code`, `{{ }}` are Mustache placeholders, not R
syntax. They are text-replaced with concrete values before the code is parsed
as R. Rendering is done by the
[whisker](https://github.com/edwindj/whisker) R package.

The three patterns used in components are:

- **`{{ variable }}`** — replaced with the value supplied at render time.
- **`{{{ variable }}}`** — unescaped replacement. Used when the value is literal
  R code (e.g., `{{{ value }}}` to insert `1`, `"text"`, or an expression).
- **`{{#list}}...{{/list}}`** — repeats its body once for each element of a
  vector parameter.

> 

Author: Add recommendation to use triple brackets.

Reviewer: Consider a paragraph stating that 

```suggestion
Mustache template variables in double braces `{{}}` are HTML escaped by default. Since mighty renders R code, we recommend using triple braces `{{{}}}`.
```

See the [Mustache manual](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html) for the
full syntax reference.

### Conventions

1. The input data set is always called `{{ domain }}`.

> 2. The code must assign the result back to `{{ domain }}`.

Author: Update to use triple brackets.

3. Use explicit package namespaces (`dplyr::mutate()`, not `mutate()`).
4. Joins must always specify an explicit `by` argument — this is enforced by
   automatic validation (see [Automatic code validation]).

## Retrieve and inspect a component

List the built-in standard components:

```{r list-standards}

> list_standards()

Reviewer: When setup with `mighty.standards`, I suppose we (sh/c)ould add a link around `mighty.metadata::mighty_study()` and `study.json`?

Author: Update section after #78 is merged.

```

Retrieve one by name:

```{r get-ady}
ady <- get_component("ady")
ady
```

Access individual fields through the active bindings:

```{r inspect-fields}
ady$title
ady$type
ady$params
ady$depends
ady$outputs
```

You can also retrieve a component from a local `.mustache` or `.R` file by
passing the file path to `get_component()`.

`get_component()` is the recommended entry point — it handles both built-in
standards and custom files. If you know you only need a built-in standard, you
can also use `get_standard()` and `get_rendered_standard()` directly.

## Render a component

Rendering fills in the Mustache placeholders with concrete values. The
`$render()` method takes parameters as named arguments and returns a
`mighty_component_rendered` object. Notice every `{{ }}` placeholder is now a
concrete name:

```{r render-ady}

> ady_rendered <- ady$render(domain = "adae", variable = "ASTDY", date = "ASTDT")

Reviewer: Should we use upper case domain names to align with CDISC standards (multiple places)?

  "    {{variable}} = dplyr::if_else(BASE != 0, AVAL / BASE, NA_real_)",
  "  )"
), r2base_file)
```

After saving this template to a `.mustache` file, load, render, and run it:

```{r custom-load}
r2base <- get_component(r2base_file)
r2base
```

```{r custom-render}
r2base_rendered <- r2base$render(
  domain = "adlb",
  variable = "R2BASE"
)
r2base_rendered$code
```

```{r custom-eval}
adlb <- pharmaverseadam::adlb |>
  dplyr::filter(PARAMCD == "ALB") |>
  dplyr::select(USUBJID, PARAMCD, AVISIT, AVAL, BASE)

head(adlb)

r2base_rendered$eval()

adlb |>
  dplyr::select(USUBJID, PARAMCD, AVISIT, AVAL, BASE, R2BASE) |>
  head()
```

## Automatic code validation

When a component is rendered, the generated code is automatically validated.
The package currently checks for **implicit joins** — any `dplyr::left_join()`,
`dplyr::inner_join()`, or similar call without an explicit `by` argument triggers
an error. This prevents a common source of bugs in clinical programming where
join columns change between studies.

Here is a component that fails validation:

```
#' @title Bad join example
#' @description Implicit join that will fail validation.
#'
#' @param domain `character` domain name

> #' @type predecessor

Reviewer: According to [mighty](https://shiny-waffle-l197g87.pages.github.io/articles/code_components.html?q=@type#column-vs-row-components), `derivation` type components

> Always create one or more new columns (specified in @outputs)

Any particular reason for these examples (also lines 298, 321, 335) to use `predecessor`?

Author: Will open new issue to fix this.

good_template <- c(
  "#' @title Good join example",
  "#' @description Explicit join that passes validation.",
  "#'",
  "#' @param domain `character` domain name",
  "#' @type predecessor",
  "#' @depends {{domain}} USUBJID",
  "#' @outputs NEWCOL",
  "#' @code",
  "{{domain}} <- {{domain}} |>",
  "  dplyr::left_join(other_data, by = dplyr::join_by(USUBJID))"
)

good_file <- tempfile(fileext = ".mustache")
writeLines(good_template, good_file)
```

```{r validation-pass}
get_rendered_component(good_file, list(domain = "adae"))$code
```

## Testing components

`get_test_component()` creates a component that runs in an **isolated R session**
with automatic code coverage tracking. This is useful both for interactive
exploration and for formal unit tests with `testthat`.

We set `check_coverage = FALSE` here because this code runs inside a vignette,
not inside a `test_that()` block. The default (`TRUE`) uses `withr::defer()` to
automatically verify coverage when a test finishes — use that default in your
actual tests.

```{r test-create}
ady_test <- get_test_component(
  component = "ady",
  params = list(domain = "adae", variable = "ASTDY", date = "ASTDT"),

>   check_coverage = FALSE

Reviewer: It is already mentioned above, so this is only if we want to help users who may copy/paste this example:
```suggestion
  # Remove this check_coverage or set it to TRUE in a real world scenario
  check_coverage = FALSE
```

)
ady_test
```

Assign input data into the isolated session:

```{r test-assign}
adae_input <- pharmaverseadam::adae |>
  dplyr::select(USUBJID, ASTDT, TRTSDT)

ady_test$assign("adae", adae_input)
ady_test$ls()
```

Execute the component and retrieve the result:

```{r test-eval}
ady_test$eval()
ady_test$get("adae") |> head()
```

Check coverage — every line of the component code should have been executed:

```{r test-coverage}
# Normal print method
ady_test
# Percent coverage
ady_test$percent_coverage
# Line coverage in a data.frame
ady_test$line_coverage
```

When `check_coverage = TRUE` (the default), coverage is verified automatically
when the test object goes out of scope using `withr::defer()`. If any line was
not executed, an error is raised. This integrates naturally with `testthat` test

> files: create the test component inside a `test_that()` block, assign data,

Reviewer: Here we could show an actual example?

Author: Will create separate vignette for testing. https://github.com/NovoNordisk-OpenSource/mighty.component/issues/83

library(mighty.component)
```

## What is a mighty component?

Components let you write a data transformation once and reuse it across studies
by swapping variable names at render time. Instead of copying and modifying code
for each new study, you maintain a single template.

A mighty component is a reusable code template for a single, well-defined data
transformation step. Components are commonly used to generate ADaM (Analysis
Dataset Model) programs, but the concept is general: any parameterized R code
snippet that reads a data set, modifies it, and writes it back can be expressed
as a component.

Components combine two ideas:

- **Mustache templating** — placeholders like `{{{ domain }}}` are filled in at
  render time, so the same logic works across different data sets and variables.
- **Roxygen-like documentation** — tags like `@title`, `@param`, and `@depends`
  describe what the component does, what it needs, and what it produces.

Think of components as reusable building blocks: each one handles a single
derivation or transformation, and you compose several of them to build a
complete program.

In the broader mighty ecosystem, `mighty.metadata` provides study-level

> configuration (via `mighty_study()` and `study.json`) that can drive which

Reviewer: I suggest either to add a link to https://novonordisk-opensource.github.io/mighty.metadata/reference/mighty_study.html or remove the paranthesis. Also, study.json is the schema - suppose you mean `_study.yaml` or even *domain*.yaml?

> configuration (via `mighty_study()` and `study.json`) that can drive which

Author: ```suggestion
configuration (via [`mighty_study()`](https://novonordisk-opensource.github.io/mighty.metadata/reference/mighty_study.html) and `_study.yml`) that can drive which
```

components are rendered and with what parameters.

## Anatomy of a component template

Below is a minimal component that doubles a column. Every tag is visible at a
glance:
```r
#' @title Double a variable
#' @description
#' Creates a new column that is twice the value of an existing column.
#'
#' @param domain `character` Name of the domain (data frame)
#' @param input `character` Name of the existing column to double
#' @param output `character` Name of the new column to create
#' @type column
#' @origin Derived
#' @depends {{{domain}}} {{{input}}}
#' @outputs {{{output}}}
#' @code
{{{domain}}} <- {{{domain}}} |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    {{{output}}} = 2 * {{{input}}}
  )
```

### Tags reference

| Tag | Purpose |
|-----|---------|
| `@title` | One-line title (required) |
| `@description` | Multi-line description (required) |

> | `@param name description` | Declares a Mustache placeholder the user must supply at render time |

Reviewer: Not sure if *render time* is the correct/best word?
```suggestion
| `@param name description` | Declares a Mustache placeholder the user must provide in metadata specifications |
```

| `@type` | Component type: `column`, `row`, `parameter`, or `internal` |

> | `@origin` | CDISC origin (optional): `Assigned`, `Collected`, `Derived`, `Not Available`, `Other`, `Predecessor`, or `Protocol` |

Reviewer: I suppose this will potentially be absorbed by the ADaM toolbox while reading metadata specifications, and either overwrite metadata specification of the `origin`. Don't know if this is worth a comment as of now?

Author: Opened issue in mighty.metadata to address this: https://github.com/NovoNordisk-OpenSource/mighty.metadata/issues/23

- **`{{{ variable }}}`** — unescaped replacement. Used when the value is literal
  R code (e.g., `{{{ value }}}` to insert `1`, `"text"`, or an expression).
- **`{{#list}}...{{/list}}`** — repeats its body once for each element of a
  vector parameter.

See the [Mustache manual](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html) for the
full syntax reference.

### Conventions

1. The input data set is always called `{{{ domain }}}`.
2. The code must assign the result back to `{{{ domain }}}`.
3. Use explicit package namespaces (`dplyr::mutate()`, not `mutate()`).
4. Joins must always specify an explicit `by` argument — this is enforced by
   automatic validation (see [Automatic code validation]).

## Retrieve and inspect a component

List the example components shipped with the package:

```{r list-components}
path <- system.file("examples", package = "mighty.component")
list_components(path)
```

Retrieve one by file path:

```{r get-ady}
ady <- get_component(
  system.file("examples", "ady.mustache", package = "mighty.component")
)
ady
```

Access individual fields through the active bindings:

```{r inspect-fields}
ady$title
ady$type
ady$params
ady$depends

> ady$outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ady$outputs
ady$origin
```

```

## Render a component

Rendering fills in the Mustache placeholders with concrete values. The
`$render()` method takes parameters as named arguments and returns a
`mighty_component_rendered` object. Notice every `{{{ }}}` placeholder is now a
concrete name:

> Note that rendering is purely textual — mighty.component replaces placeholders

Reviewer: The rendering in [lines 122-127](https://github.com/NovoNordisk-OpenSource/mighty.component/pull/74/changes#diff-f454cd9dc1b23c01b8d73e51ae9fadca14a0035a536fa96963806bd96750d625R122) only shows the header and not the code section. So the things I note is
1) `@title`, `@description` (present but without *Description* header), and `@origin` is not rendered in either of the renditions
2) `@Parameters` section not present in `$render()`
3) `@code` not present in `$get_component()`

Hence the thing to note, is that `depends` and `outputs` are now having placeholders replaced

Author: @michaelhedegaardthomsen Agreed to create new issue for this and print methods.

Reviewer: #85
